who has been at Texas A&M since 1973 and
is in the Department of Educational
Administration and is going to share a few ideas or
thoughts about changes that have occurred at
Texas A&M since 1973 or since you arrived. And can
you tell me from your perception or your vantage
point what have been some of the major changes that
have impacted the university or the College of
Education? Well, the impact of the College of Ed,
of course, is we've had a change in the dean, the
dean's office and the department head office.
When I came there in 73, of course, Frank Hubert was
the dean. And now Dean Corrigan is the dean. And
Harold Hawkins was the department head. And now
Dave Earleson's the department head as far as
Administratively, those have been significant
changes, and then from the standpoint of
enrollment, size of faculty. When I came there,
there were four professors in the department, and
now there are 11 full-time tenured faculty or
tenure-track faculty. We admitted an average of
22 doctoral students and master's students a
year, and now we admit somewhere around 60 a year.
In the last two years alone, we've admitted 86
doctoral students in just two years, and from 1975
to 81,
we only admitted 122 graduate students total.
into the program. So our numbers have grown
significantly. What are you attributing all of
this to?
Well, the growth of the university is probably
based on the need for master's and particularly
doctoral degrees in public school
administration to move up into the top leadership
positions in this state. Used to be a master's
degree in certification would make you eligible
for the top level positions, and now it's the PhD or
the EDD is required to get in line to be eligible to
secure the positions. Okay. Because you've
mentioned the two leaderships in the college and
in the department, how has the leadership in both
of those affected the climate or the culture of the
number one, the department, being that that was a
change, or the college? Well, Frank Hubert, you
know, and his, you might say, autocratic
administrative leadership style, he literally
caught all the shots for the college and for the
departments. I sat in an admissions meeting with
Frank where he'd literally have the whole pile of
candidates in front of him, and he'd go through and
say, accept, deny, accept, deny, and when he got
done with that process, he'd tell the faculty on
And that's the way our admissions were ran. I mean,
Frank literally selected who he wanted into the
admin department. And where when Dean Corrigan
came in, of course, he turned over to Hawkins,
total control of the department. And at that
point, the faculty selected the candidates. And
of course, David Erlandson, who came in after
Hawkins, He's a very democratic leader, and
we as a total faculty make all the decisions on
policy and key decisions as it relates to
curriculum, employment of our faculty. Again,
one to Frank Hubert's era, you'd go up and
interview with Frank, and he either hired you or he
didn't. The department head was merely a
personnel director that lined up the final
interview. And now with Dean Corrigan, There the
department makes a decision and the
recommendation goes to the dean and in eight years
he's been there. I've never known him to deny the
request of the faculty for any new faculty member
that we wanted nor ever got involved with the
admissions process. Dean Corgan's never sat in on
one admissions meeting in all the years he's been
dean of our college. And when Frank Hubert was
here, we never had an admissions meeting unless
Frank was going to be there. So those, you know, as
related to students, he's selected. His criteria
was 99% GRE. And under Dean Corrigan, we select our
own students. And we have seven different
variables, including GRE as one of the seven for
admissions. So it's a much more flexible, open,
realistic admissions process. And that's
directly attributed to the two different drastic
styles. of leadership in the dean's office and to
some extent a change in leadership style from the
department because harold hawkins pretty much
followed the dean's lead as far as being an
autocratic leader he didn't delegate or turn
loose much power and authority to the faculty
where david delegates almost everything to the
faculty where possible and so the climate of the
organizations probably had 180 degree change in
the two administrations. Was it hard to adjust to
not having a lot of input to having so much input? Do
people handle that pretty well? Well, in that
admin department, where all of us who are in the
department have come there with a tremendous
amount of administrative experience and were
used to calling the shots in organizations or
having a leadership style which we insisted that
our subordinates share in the decision-making
process. No, it was very easy for us. It was very
refreshing. It was a sigh of relief that now we had
control. of the department and in essence we're
going to be successful or fail based on our own
input knowledge and awareness of how we could run
that department and many of us ran far bigger
faculties and staffs professionally before we
got to the university than any of us collectively
ever had to participate in such a small department
of 8, 9, 10, 11 faculty members. And none of us were
really used to working for a superordinate like
Frank Huber who totally, you know, was an
autocratic leader and made all the decisions for
us. We resented it as a faculty, and some of that
resentment was so obvious that some of the early
faculty members did not get tenure and were forced
to leave because, quite frankly, Dean Huber
didn't like them. So he got rid of them. He just
didn't put them on tenure, and so they had to leave.
So he made all the tenure decisions as well. Oh,
absolutely. Frank, if Frank didn't like you, you
were in big trouble. You just didn't stay around
very long. And if Frank liked you or if he perceived
you were doing your job, you didn't have any
problems with him. I personally never had a
problem with him from the moment he hired me. until
the day he retired. I never had a bad word with him
and got along with him well. But I was such a junior
faculty, working on soft money, he had no reason,
he and I had no reason to cross and all the things he
heard about what the department was doing and the
area I was responsible for was all positive, so he
had no reason to get upset with what I was doing as an
individual. OK, now the college, like you said,
has changed somewhat in the climate and the
culture because of the two drastic changes.
However, the mission has remained pretty much the
same, the teaching, the research, and the
service, which is in conjunction with the mission
of a land-grant university. To what extent do you
feel that the college is achieving its mission?
And in what proportion, maybe, of the teaching,
research? Because I think it has shifted
somewhat. maybe even within the two
administrations? Yeah, I think teaching is
obviously the number one area that is getting the
most attention now at the university. I think back
in the earlier year, particularly under Dean
Hubert, with the faculty as small as it was, at
least in the admin department, and I think to a
great extent the other departments, there was a
lot off-campus offerings throughout the state,
Temple, Belton, Killeen, Houston, the Valley,
San Angelo, the Beaumont area. A lot of courses
were taken off campus to serve the needs of
students through the extension program. And the
last few years, you know, most of those programs
have dried up. The university has has more went
into a teaching research posture, where teaching
primarily on the main campus and emphasizing
research and now service to the field is just a
secondary or byproduct of the College of
Education. We used to go down, several
departments would go down to Houston and for two
years we did the certification on-site for all of
HISD's central office administrators. We used to
teach in Austin and train their administrators in
the central office. We literally had a network of
off-campus sites all over the state of Texas. and
now the only off-campus center we maintain is here
in San Antonio and we are the only department in the
college other than IDED that is doing any type of
off-campus teaching and all the other
departments have come back into the university
and are very content to have the students come to
the campus to get the instruction and are not
willing to send their faculty off-campus anymore
to do the off-campus. So is it de-emphasizing the
service part of it? However, this department is
perceived by a lot of the other departments as
being very service-oriented. So does everybody
feel that Service is the emphasis of the
department versus research, specifically
research, because there seems to be. If the
faculty was honest, they'd say we're probably 40%
teaching, 40% service, and about 20% research. in
reality because with the principal center that's
certainly a service center entity the community
ed center the higher ed center now that stan
carpenter's developed in the process of
developing the ucea connection we had with
editing through phil west etc that was a lot of
service oriented type of activities then the
heavy numbers of in excess of 200 full-time
doctoral enrollments in the department now.
Those two things probably occupy about 80% of our
time, and then there's 20% research. I don't see
that much individual faculty research going on
that is not directly connected with dissertation
research. I think, now if you take into
consideration dissertation research, that
percentage might go up, but when I think of
research at universities, I think of faculty
members going out on their own doing some creative
experimental research by themselves and then
writing that up and that making a contribution. I
don't see our faculty in our department doing that
much independent research. Does the faculty get
any pressure from the administration to increase
research activity and decrease service, or do
they? If it is, I haven't been aware of it, no. I
think that our dean is satisfied that we are making
an impact in the state by the service that we are
rendering through the different programs within
the department. And he knows we're finishing
larger than usual records of studies and
dissertations that he hasn't really put any
pressure on the department or any of the faculty
members, as I'm aware of. Does that affect the
tenure? Anything on your evaluation for tenure? I
don't think so. I think
if you're teaching your load, providing some
external services to the field, taking care of
your students and maintaining your office hours,
publishing occasional journal articles based on
research of your students or some independent
research that you conduct as a faculty member.
We've never had that pressure. Oh, thank you. Very
good. We appreciate that. What did you do, run?
Thank you. OK. Now, has the tremendous growth that
you talked about earlier affected how you were
able to work with students? And the growth has been
more in the undergraduate, but you expressed it's
also grown tremendously in your department. How
has that affected your ability to work with
students like you'd like on a one-on-one? I think
that I spend probably 80% of my time working with
students. Last year, I finished 16 PhDs and ADDs. I
chaired eight of those, and I sat on eight more. And
with the San Antonio program here, I probably and
responsible for somewhere from 25 to 40% of all the
new admissions that come into the department. I
recruit them and bring them in for the department.
So I spend about 80% of my time on taking care of
students and teaching in the off-campus setting.
And by the nature of my research course, I'm still
actively involved with students developing
their proposals. So I'm extremely busy, but I
don't think anyone's being neglected. because of
the large numbers we deal with. I choose to work
with students and spend a lot of time taking care of
their needs, and this may be an excuse why I don't
publish as much as probably some people would like
me to, but it hadn't affected me. Can you share some
ideas of what your perceptions are of the
collaboration among departments within the
college, or maybe even collaboration within
other colleges, Probably during the last three or
four years, and I directly attribute this to Dean
Corrigan's administration and leadership style
encouragement for it to happen, I've seen a
tremendous amount of cooperation between the
departments. An example of that is the
instructional management certificate between
EDCI and Ed Admin where we jointly collaborate
with about an 86 to 90 hour doctoral program and we
really don't care where the student gets the
degree in EDCI or Ed Ad. They take almost an equal
amount of hours Four or five years ago that wasn't
even conceivable, let alone possible, because of
the structure of the departments and the rigidity
of the administration that kept us all pretty well
turfed to our own areas and we didn't integrate or
have an interdisciplinary approach. With Dean
Corrigan, we have a lot of interaction now with the
various departments, the pro-seminars that were
developed in 78, 79 through the Record of Study
program, you might say had forced integration
potential where it required the six departments
to work together in providing the pro-seminar
experience, and that was really the beginning for
this working cooperative. And then as we got to be
more familiar with each other as faculty members
and as disciplines, more collaborative
interaction, you know, occurred. And now we've
got lots of interactions with various
departments, mainly within the college, but over
with Mildred Fox Shop and I, industrial
engineering, That's another example. We've done
a lot of work with them over the last five or six
years. And so I think it's been positive. It's
going on. It continues to grow. And we now have a
mentality of an interdisciplinary approach to
educating doctoral students rather than a
departmental approach to educating doctoral
students. Who was the name that you mentioned in
industrial ed? No, industrial engineering. I'm
sorry. It's Mildren Fox. Mildren,
M-I-L-D-R-E-N? Mm-hmm. And he teaches the
collective bargaining, arbitration, and the
public and private sector. It's a 10-hour block
that deals with the whole domain of arbitration,
collective bargaining, negotiation. And ed-ac
students have to take that? It's a support field
for a minor, for ed-ad majors and we have a large
number of our majors do elect to take the i
engineering support field because of its
implication for unions and grievances and
collective bargaining and that whole nine yards
of which is just for the, not so much for the
educator here in the south, but you know, Shanker
supposedly five or six years ago said Texas was
going to be the next area that they tried to get
involved with unions. Well, it really hasn't
happened, but the material that Fox covers in
there is of such interest to the administrators,
and I think it helps them work with negotiating
contracts, working with school boards to
negotiate contracts with teachers, and it's
still a beneficial support field. Okay, the next
question has to do with your perceptions of how
outsiders view the College of Education at A&M. Do
you have a feel for that since you do some
traveling? Yeah, I think, again, in the early
years, you've got to understand the college was
formed in 1969. I got there in 73. We were an unknown
entity probably up through, even through the 70s.
I think around 1980 and beyond, and certainly in
the last three or four years, with the
leadership of Dean Corrigan, the fact that he was
selected as the only dean on the select committee
to work with Ross Perot, and that got so much press
with House Bill 72 and the involvement of our
college and the certification, the training of
administrators. and the numbers that we're
training and producing on an annual basis I think
has moved us to the forefront in the eyes of many of
the educators across this state that we are now the
college of education in the state that probably
has the best overall delivery of doctoral
certification and master's students in
education and I think that's probably a complete
turnaround from when I came here in 73 to what it is
today. Okay how about maybe a vision of what you
feel that that's facing and the college appears to
be at a crossroads because of the undergraduate
program being drastically affected with these
new changes, how do you see the future of the
College of Education at this point? It's hard to
say what the impact of 994 is going to be on the
teacher education part of the College of Ed. I
think from the standpoint of the Ed Psych
Department, from the Ed Admin Department, the
IDED Department, particularly... All the
non-teachers. Yeah, the non-teaching areas.
We're We're only going to increase in numbers of
quality and quantity of students with I think
you'll see more of an emphasis on minority
recruitment and actually completion, retention
and completion of those students through our
program. I see the quality of the program
continuing to get better and better. the
opportunity for a minority to become faculty
members with our department, which will add
another dimension to deal with this increased
population of administrators that we'll be
dealing with. And I just see things getting more
quality, a better program,
perhaps a little bit more emphasis on urban
education because of the strong need for urban
school administrators and so many of our urban
school districts so highly inundated with
minority populations, both black and Hispanic. I
think we may change our emphasis to more of an urban
curriculum than a rural curriculum. Most of our
doctoral students are coming from the larger
urban areas. And that's where they need tend to
need that terminal degree to sustain those upward
mobility and to keep the top administrative
positions. In the rural areas, certification and
just some years of experience seem to be enough
education. But as we get into the urban setting and
the big suburbans around these urban school
districts, the doctorate's almost mandatory.
And I think that's where we're going to see the
change. Well, and the fact, too, that you have
brought it part of the campus to San Antonio, for
example, has increased that or has helped that
considerably because it has made it at least a
feasible possibility for the people that have to
work full-time and cannot possibly move over
there full-time. Right, and I think that the
market here in San Antonio, of course, will only
increase for us as we are capable of handling
larger numbers of
doctoral students myself in a few short years.
I've been down here and probably have 30 or 40 in the
process now, and probably 60% of those are
minority. There you are. But you don't
necessarily recruit the minorities. It's just
the way it happens, or are you aggressively
pursuing the minority recruitment? I probably
more aggressively recruit minority if I feel by
reviewing their transcripts and interviewing
them one-on-one, that they really have the
ability, the interest to pursue a doctorate, I
probably try to encourage them that they can do it
and that I'll help them more so than I would maybe
some non-minority students, just because the
numbers of those folks are always out there. And
the fact, too, that we draw those in, other faculty
members draw those in from other parts of the
state, and I think one of the advantages of me being
down here, and purposes, quite frankly, is to...
to increase the minority pool in the university
and department and to get these folks in the
programs and to graduate them, get them back out in
these top leadership positions, which we've
already demonstrated we can do and we have done. So
I think it's worth it. OK. Do you have something
that stands out in your mind as a highlight of the
time, the years that you have spent at Texas A&M, or
maybe a contribution? And we've already touched
on a lot of the contributions you've made by the
recruiting traveling to San Antonio weekly to
teach and so forth. But is there something, an
insight, or something that stands out? Well,
probably for me, it's been the opportunity to work
with the community education movement in the
state. And the fact when I came here, there were six
school districts that had community education.
And today, there are in excess of over 100 school
districts. And I more or less had... input on
almost all of those coming into being, and
particularly in the San Antonio, Austin, and the
Rio Grande area, which comprises probably 50% of
all the community ed projects in the state. You
know, I personally started all those projects,
trained the directors, and served as their
consultant for many years that that we've been in
existence and to have that opportunity to go out
and then stand back eight, ten years later and look
at a place like Austin that's got 29,000
non-duplicated enrollments in their community
at evening classes, over 100,000 participants.
Then you come down the road to Comal, New
Bronzeville and look at the success of those
programs and you move into the San Antonio area
where we originally got the SAISD involved, which
led us to Northeast, and now Northside is
developing an excellent community ed model, and
from Edgewood and East Central, South Sand,
Harlandale, you know, it's gratifying to me to see
the fruits of my labor that was availed to me by the
fact that I was at a major university that had a
grant from a private foundation that gave me the
latitude and freedom to go out and work in these
school districts and try out some ideas and they
were embraced by what I call futuristic leaders
who saw the potential and now we have quite a strong
community education network in what I call the
I-35 syndrome from Dallas-Fort Worth all the way
down through San Antonio and that's probably the
highlight of my career. I think A lot of people
could have come in and developed the off-campus
program in San Antonio because there was such a
need for it. And the availability of a university
like A&M to want to do off-campus work, that in
itself I don't think is that unique. But the
ability, I think, with my 21 years in community ed
to help start so many of these 100 school districts
that I personally was the original contact the
trainer, the follow-up consultant to these
projects, and then see them sustain themselves
far beyond after I left or had any influence at all
on the success of those programs, that's probably
the high spot for me. Well, now that that soft money
has sort of dwindled, what do you see happening?
Because community ed has picked up momentum in a
lot of places, and it's almost, like they said,
something whose time has come now, and it's coming
of age. What is happening, and I know the center is
still at Texas A&M and probably will continue
there because it is getting support from the
university. Do you perceive any changes there? I
think when we only saw about nine or ten of the
districts folding when the soft money this year
finally ended is a strong indication that we've
hit upon a philosophy or an idea that once
implanted in a local school district's
leadership style or philosophy of education is
very difficult to remove from the system, that I
think community education as we have developed it
here will be around for many, many years in the
future. I'm concerned about the expansion of
projects
so that new school districts will some outside
influence of either state funding again for pilot
projects or private foundation money but as far as
sustaining the network of approximately 100
school districts between now and the year 2000 I
think in 10-12 years from now we'll probably have
80% of what we're working with right now will still
be in place but yet that only represents about 10%
of school districts in the state and if we don't get
some outside support from either legislature or
from some private foundation like we had in the
early years of the development of Community Ed in
Texas, I don't think we'll see any growth and I
think that'll be regrettable. Our growth may be in
the standpoint of occasionally adding new
projects, but I think those new projects will be
added by former graduate students of our program
who take the Community Ed curriculum or courses
and believe in it as a leadership style, implement
the program as part of their offerings to a local
school district in turn for hiring them and
that'll probably just maintain what we lose of
those districts that have a change in
administration of boards or superintendent and
decide not to fund again and we'll maybe pick up
those numbers by new young administrators coming
in and developing but I don't think in the next five
to ten years if we don't have any influence of state
legislation or some priority by the state board
that will give some incentives to local school
districts to expand their use of public schools
and go into the... Do you think the elected state
board will have any impact? Will it change
attitudes in any way? Because the support has not
been there legislatively recently, or at least
not as much as it's needed, right? It's hard to say.